>> My name is Steve Peters.
I work in the Mac OS X Performance Group.
My colleague James McIlree is in front and
he'll join me later to answer questions.
We'd like to tell you a bit about DTrace today.
And this will be a very practical hands on presentation.
Are they any DTrace users in the audience today?
Okay, there's a smattering.
Yeah. Right?
I think you'll find a lot that's very,
very familiar, identical in fact.
And for the rest of you, we hope you'll
be DTrace users by the end of this hour.
So, DTrace is a system observability
facility that's new to Mac OS X in Leopard.
It joins the rich collection of Mac OS X
development tools already present in Leopard,
in some cases extending the reach of what you can do.
And in some case consolidating which
helped us in our work on Leopard.
But more important, you can use DTrace to gain
insight into the behavior of your applications.
And we're very pleased to acknowledge right up front
that DTrace was developed at Sun Microsystems.
It's open soft, open source software.
Appears in Open Solaris and we did the port
to Mac OS X over the last 18 months or so.
So what do I think you're going to learn today?
First, what DTrace is and a little bit about what it's not.
How to use DTrace.
You should come away and you may even want to try doing
this as you sit here today, typing small DTrace scripts
and gaining some interesting insights
into the system you're working on.
We'll talk in some detail about the D language, including,
you'll see some patterns and maybe
some pitfalls along the way.
We'll talk about the DTrace ToolKit.
And you don't want to leave home without
that if you're a sys admin or a,
a developer whose out in the field correcting problems.
And we'll talk a bit about the roster of DTrace
providers that we're going to ship with Leopard.
So if anybody has to write a trip report and report
on what this session is about, here's your slide.
DTrace is a comprehensive, dynamic
tracing framework for Mac OS X.
DTrace provides a powerfool infrastructure to
administrators, developers and service personnel
to concisely answer arbitrary questions about the
behavior of the operating system and user programs.
It's written by Sun, probably by marketing folks
and it's a nice, high level pitch about DTrace.
I think the important piece here is
arbitrary questions and you'll see how
that emerges as a theme throughout the talk today.
So what are the advantages of DTrace?
Why did we take this on?
As we said it's new and unique tracing
technology in Leopard, what's unique about it?
First of all zero disabled cost.
We think this is an important feature.
There, you'll see thousands and thousands of probe
points, points where you could collect data in Leopard,
yet they cost you nothing if you
don't use them or very nearly nothing.
DTrace is dynamic.
You don't need to start an application, stop it,
decompile it, set flags, reboot, you just use DTrace,
point it at the facility you want to
investigate and let it go.
It's system-wide.
You can see the tiniest bit down in the guts of the
kernel all the way up through Cocoa Applications
and messages being passed among objects there.
DTrace is always available.
We're going to ship it as part of the user install.
You can use it diagnose problems in the field.
Yea. And it's comprehensive.
Essentially any place a threat of execution
can land, DTrace can shed some light.
And the piece that's most important to me or most impressed
me, is it's programmable, programmable, programmable.
All right?
There's a language, an interpreter,
a model of execution and the freedom
to turn the ship any way you want
that's unlike most of the tracing tools
that you perhaps have encountered along your careers.
And the, the exhortation here is pose and
answer arbitrary questions, follow your nose.
Do an experiment, look at the DTrace output, scratch head,
think about what might be the next interesting
question to ask, immediately code that and go.
It has that style of interaction.
And it turns out DTrace is an important
enabling technology for the Xray tool
and you learned about that yesterday in session 309.
There's a DTrace instrument template where you can do
some of the same kind of improvisational programming
to build new instruments in Xray with DTrace.
So just as important as what DTrace
is, is what DTrace isn't.
It doesn't replace all your tried and true tools.
You're still going to be using the
right tool for the job at hand.
So for example, if you need instruction level
timings and you're tightest loops, look to Shark.
I mean that's been really worked out very carefoolly
and beautifoolly over the last couple of years.
For memory leaks, go straight to Xray's ObjectAlloc
template or the Guard Malloc libraries.
For figuring out where something might be hung up or
spinning under the spad, go to the sampler instrument.
And there's no magic here with DTrace.
You still have to understand the problem.
It's not a one push button solution to, to all
performance problems or bug investigations.
You need to be able to generate hypothesis, write a
little script, interpret the results, and iterate.
All right, so for the visual learners
like myself, here's a picture.
There, there's quite a lot of software in the DTrace stack,
but it sort of naturally bisects into what sits in user land
above the dash line and what sits inside the kernel.
So in user land, sort of starting from the top, you're going to
express your analysis and investigation steps in scripts.
Often you'll write these at the command line, sometimes
they'll be large enough that you'll want to put them
in a text file, edit them and send them through.
And what you send them through is a command line interpreter
called /usr/sbin/dtrace, DTrace at the command line.
It talks to a, it's a sort of a thin
veneer on lib.dtrace.dylib,
dtrace.dylib is a compiler for the D Language.
It all, it knows how to communicate with the
kernel layer in an organized and safe fashion.
And it turns out that that's the place
that Xray hooks into too, is libdtrace.
So it's got a couple of clients.
Below the line in the kernel sort of the big
piece of DTrace, the DTrace virtual machine.
Interprets the byte codes, sets up
the trace points, collects the data,
sends it back up into user land for you to look at it.
The virtual machine in turn relies on a set of semantically
knowledgeable modules that are called providers.
So if you're interesting for example in important events
in the life of a process, you'll turn to the proc provider
and see things like exec starts, exits,
forks, lightweight thread starts and so forth.
If you're interested in when io gets started and
finishes up, you'll appeal to the io provider.
Similarly if you want to run profiling experience,
experiments, catch events on millisecond boundaries
for example, you'll turn to the profile provider.
We'll be spending a lot of time
with the system call provider.
Remember system calls are the programming interfaces
that sort of span the user land to kernel boundary.
Things like read, write, select, get me some memory, exit.
And really interesting provider here that James
has done a lot of work on is a fasttrap provider.
It knows how to reach from the kernel,
back into user land, place instrumentation,
and collect data from the instruments
it places back in user land.
So we can go right into say malloc in libSystem
and notice when malloc is called,
notice what the arguments to malloc are and so forth.
Similarly fasttrap can instrument your application.
Any function entry point, any return
and any instruction in between.
In fact, fasttrap is capable of implementing just about
any instruction in the entire memory image of Mac OS X.
So enough talking, let's take a quick, quick demo.
So great. So say DTrace here,
I've got the right machine, good.
And DTrace announces what its arguments
are, what it's command line flags are.
There are a ton of them, but we'll get away in
most practice using just about five as you'll see.
And probably the first and most interesting one is to ask
DTrace what are the probe points that you know about?
Where can I collect data in my system right now?
So let's clear that out.
Grab this guy.
And here I've said DTrace -l
and pushed it through more.
And we begin to see the sort of
long list of DTrace probe points.
The left most column, increasing series of small integers
are numeric ID, then we have the name of the provider,
a module, which helps us disambiguate names, a function
name and a particular point within that function
where we're going to collect data, where the,
the probe could be attached so to speak.
So let's see, let's go down and here's, so 19,000
probes later, we hit vminfo, which is going to,
if we were interested in when paging happens or page
faults occur, we'd take a look at what vminfo can provide.
There's the proc providers we talked about before,
forks, exits, io provider, when we start and stop io.
And I think we're pretty close to the end here, so on
this system 19,448 probes in place right now for DTrace.
And we haven't mentioned the probes that you could provide,
put into any running application, Mail, Safari, your app.
Which can make this one of probes grow very, very fast.
It's not unusual to, to see 100,000 probes appear
when you instrument a big Cocoa application.
So let's, let's latch onto one of these
probes and see what's going on on this system.
( Period of silence )
So here's the sort of canonical little DTrace command.
DTrace -n says I'm going to give
the D Language program right here
on the command line immediately following and here it is.
It says, let's look at what the sys call
provider can tell us about everything it knows.
We say no more, DTrace fills in and says, well we'll
tell you any time a system call is made on this system.
And we'll pipe that through more because as
you'll see these things go on for quite a while.
So I don't know if you notice, there are 854 sys call
probes matched and now we begin to see the entry and return
from a whole, whole long list of these things.
All right, so absent any specific
direction, DTrace does the natural thing.
It says, I hit this probe, I'm going to tell you about it.
Puts it in a buffer and we eventually see it in more.
But this is sort of an overload of data, there's
an overwhelming amount of stuff to look at.
Is there some way we can organize this?
And DTrace has very power, powerfool
facilities for digging into the data,
massaging it in ways that help
us understand sort of immediately
with immediate impact what's going on on the system.
Let's look at one way to do that.
So again, we're thinking about system calls that are going
on on this you know what other, otherwise is an idle system.
And again here's that command line, DTrace -n,
I'm going to give you an immediate script here.
You're again asking the sys call
provider to offer up its probes.
We'll take all the entry probes.
And now here in the brackets, we have a
little bit of computation we'd like to do.
We're going to fill in a table called ag and the rows of the
table will be keyed by the name of the probe, read, write,
select, ioctal, the particular system call that we dove into.
And we'll just increment a count for that guy.
We'll talk a little bit more about what this at
sign syntax means and why we're using the function
on the right hand side in a couple of minutes.
But let's just see what happened while I was talking
over that, that data collection was occurring.
We'll stop the data collection and observe
that a little table was printed out.
Keyed on the left, my left, by the name
of the system call that we dove into.
And the value on the right is the number
of times we encountered it, all right
So sort of simple counting exercise.
Interesting that these two guys at the top sig
all stack and the sig proc mass, remember those.
Those are you know, I probably talked for 15 seconds or net
1300 of those, that's a fair amount of system call activity.
Well, you know sort of the next question following our
nose is well which process is making these system calls?
You know otherwise, this was an otherwise idle system.
Can we look into that?
Well, sure.
So let's clear this.
( Period of silence )
Okay, so same idea.
going to look at entry probes from sys call.
We're going to collect them in a table, but now
the index to the table is the process name.
So as a thread comes through and hits a
system call, say makes a read system call,
that traps into the DTrace virtual machine
and the first thing the DTrace virtual
machine says, hm, whose the process?
What's the name of that process
associated with the thread that did this?
I'll need to remember that because
someone may make a table like this.
Well, it doesn't quite work that
way, but it maintains a collection
of special named variables that
you can use for purposes like this.
All right, so again after talking for 15 seconds or so, hmm.
Here's the list of processes now that made system calls.
And woo, window server at the top with
674 system calls made in that interval.
I don't know, was I shaking the mouse?
I'm not so sure.
So now maybe we can dive in foorther and
ask well, window server, what, what,
what system calls was window server making?
And here's a script that'll do just that.
( Period of silence )
So now we introduce another element of the
D scripting language, a predicate or filter.
Enclosed by slashes and it says, whenever
we dive into one of these probe points,
detect if the name of the process is Windows server.
If so, go on and do this action, otherwise, you're done.
Nothing interesting here.
So when we do see a system call made by Windows server, we're
going to collect it in the style of the original table example,
namely we'll index by the name of
the system call and count those up.
So what did we get?
Oh my goodness, it's the Windows server who's making that
sort of high level of sig alt stack and sig part mass calls.
So that's sort of there's the paradigm right?
A series of questions, a series of
scripts and maybe some insight at the end.
That's our next stop for me is the Windows
server folks and asking what's going on here?
All right, so back to the slides.
( Period of silence )
So what have we been doing?
We've been writing little DTrace
programs at the command line.
Here's a summary of what they were.
Sort of a little growing pattern that we've been using.
And at the heart of all this was this D Language.
This is the DTrace D Language not the Mars D Language.
It's very much like C, you should be, if you know
a little bit of C, or you know a little Perl,
you should very much at home with the D Language.
So I mentioned before, it's compiled to bytecodes and
those are passed down into the DTrace virtual machine
and the kernel, where they're interpreted, sort of held
onto until some probe fires and then off we go and figure
out if we're going to do some table counting and just
where we're going to put the entries in the table.
libdtrace.dylib shipping on every user system for
Leopard does most of the heavy work, heavy lifting here.
The language though is lightweight.
It's really small.
It's quite simple.
There's no explicit control flow.
There's a sort of technical safety reason for that.
You don't want to get stuck in a loop by mistake.
Say if you're tracing I/O interrupts, that
would not be good for the life of your system.
There are no user defined functions.
Variable declarations are optional.
You know you just say what you mean and
variables spring to life, very Perl like.
The D Language is built of common elements.
The first are these, the probe clause,
the foondamental element of D program.
We sort of stretch these out onto one line.
You can of course, text file, make it
look even more C-like or Perl-like.
The probe calls, it's lazy.
You know if you're missing some element for example
in our first script we omitted the
predicate and the action statements entirely.
The interpreter fills in something sensible to do.
Namely announce that you visited this probe.
All right?
The first piece in the probe clause is the probe descriptor.
That's that tupole of four components that uniquely
identify a point in the system where we're collecting data.
First component is the provider.
We've talked about that.
You're familiar with several providers now.
Second is the module and you'll be
more familiar with that as we go along
but it's basically a way to set separate name spaces up.
Then a function, read, write, select, malloc,
and a particular point within that
function that we might want to probe.
The entry, the return, some hex offset within some function.
( Period of silence )
Supports wild cards, you saw that in our very first example.
We provided none of module function or name.
The interpreter did the right thing.
It said, oh he wants to look at
all 854 of the sys call probes.
The probe descriptor naturally is really
the only required part of a probe clause.
You got to say what you want to hook the sys call to.
Can list probes via DTrace -l,
we've done that already.
If you want to sharpen that, mine down into what
particular provider might be able to offer,
you can essentially just set up a probe descriptor when
prefixed with this -l flag, nothing gets enabled,
no probes fire, but it will list all the
probe matching sys call provider name,
sorry function being one of the
write system calls on the system.
There's write, p write, write no
cancel, so forth on Mac OS X.
Some examples, our very first one, sys
call all the arguments wildcarded.
Here's a provider that I've referred to
but we haven't seen explicitly before.
Suppose we want it to look at our process number
1017 and we may have gleaned that from one
of the other tools on Mac OS X PS or top.
So we say pid provider, process number 1017, in the module
libSystem, I want to look every place printf returns.
And finally because Objective-C
plays such a large role on Mac OS X,
James went ahead an implemented Objective-C
provider that derives from the pid provider.
So imagine that process 1017 was a Cocoa app.
We could look into its Objective-C name space.
Any class or category, we've omitted
the sort of second module piece.
Any instance method that begins with the
letters draw, wildcard the rest at the entry.
We'd like to probe those points and fire through
to the rest of the stuff when that's hit.
Next piece in the probe clause is the predicate.
That's a condition, a Boolean, a filter.
We evaluate it every time the probe fires.
We use it to focus in on just the
pieces of data of interest.
We may be waiting for an obscure
condition that triggers a bug.
This is a way to sort of keep our probes
out of the way until that event happens.
And then start collecting lots and lots of interesting
data to help us diagnose a particular situation.
Some quick examples we've already seen, the
comparison of the special variable exec name
that the interpreter maintains with a fixed string.
We might be interested in when Perl for
example makes and open sys call, right?
So combining the probe descriptor that tells us what
we're looking at, the filter to say when we want to see it.
We might go on to do some interesting data logging activity.
So here we refer to sort of an arithmetic Boolean.
If my call count exceeds five, then we're going to
trap into the action statements for this probe,
post incrementing the my count call along the way.
If my call count is less than five, we don't bother.
Perhaps the first five opens are uninteresting to us, but on
the sixth one our app falls apart and we'd like to know why.
And finally we can actually dig in to the state
of the probe that fired itself a little bit.
Here, if we ask for the tripping on entry point to
open sys call, we can look at its arguments list.
Right? Argument zero to the open system call happens
to be the string name of the file we're about to open.
We can get a hold of that through copyinstr, talk
about that in a moment, and compare it to a fixed string.
So we might be interested in looking for all the times in
the life of the system when terminal opens its plist file.
Action statements, this is the computation,
this is sort of the heart of the DTrace probe.
These are expressions in the D Language.
Arithmetic, relational, logical,
bit operation, semantics just like C,
syntax just like C, it's going to be very familiar.
Other action statements assigned to program variables, you
can remember some state, you can remember that state either
for the life of the, the duration
of the firing of the probe.
You can remember it globally for the
duration of the experiment you're running.
And you can segregate that data perhaps
by the thread on which an event occurs.
We'll say more about that in a little bit too.
There are built in functions.
printf does an actual thing.
Same syntax as C. Stack, we can ask for
a stack back trace when a probe fires.
If you're familiar with that from debuggers.
There are string manipulation functions,
strlen, strtoke, substr.
And an interesting class of functions that I've
already referred to, copyin, copyinster, copyout.
We've already mentioned special
variables whose value is maintained
by the interpreter, execname being the first one.
probefoonc, the name of the function that was triggered.
The interpreter also maintains a timestamp.
It has actually three notions of, of time progressing.
Wall time, virtual time for the
process and one other version.
It maintains the, a notion of what process
ID was associated with the thread that ran
into the probe, the thread ID and so forth.
There's several more.
You'll find them in the documentation.
And in action statements assignments as we mentioned
can just create variables out of thin air so to speak.
So some simple examples call to printf, where the argument,
the string argument is actually extracted
from the system call that was made.
Here we assign that string perhaps we
want to hang on to it to see when it closes,
there's something interesting about
when that, that file closes.
Who knows?
At this point we're interested in when Perl
does an open, where we in the Perl executable?
So we'll ask for the user stack
trace, stack trace back in user land.
So let's look at a few more demonstrations.
( Period of silence )
So here's that use of printf. The
special built in variable execname.
That copyin function that's going to pull the first
argument to an open call out of the probe firing.
And we're going to tag a, put a little extra argument
on the end of the DTrace command that says be quiet,
print none of the identifying information about the probe.
We've handled it in our printf. So let's
see what happens when this guy runs.
So he's off to the races.
( Period of silence )
And what happens if we have a look at the about box.
Right, great.
All sorts of open calls.
Most of them made by log in window, who's
managing the, that dialog box as you might expect.
A bunch of calls to open made by ATSServer, which is,
manages the fonts, the collection of fonts on the system.
( Period of silence )
So I think I'd like to sort of broaden our horizons now
away from the, the sort of narrow system call interface
and look a bit more about how DTrace can
tell us things about processes we construct.
So here's a, oh hang on, let me clear the screen.
Here's Hello World.
Maybe a little more complicated that versions
that are in K and R. So let's run this guy.
It does the natural thing.
Right? Hello WWDC.
And now let's, let's take a look into the execution
of this very simple user binary and
ask does this thing ever call malloc?
You know it might be an interesting thing to answer,
certainly in a much larger program you'd like to know that.
So here's DTrace -n and the new construct here.
pid provider, kind of a macro argument
and we'll get to that in a second.
So pid provider is going to instrument a process in user land.
We'd like to give it the process number,
but we don't quite know that yet.
And we'll look for entries into malloc.
And when we see one, we'd like to see the
stack, stack back trace up in user land.
Well, how do we fill in the process number?
Well, we ask DTrace to start the program itself,
keep track of the pid that gets started and feed it
into that script so it knows just who to instrument.
And away this guy goes.
And sure enough, here's the execution.
And when that thing finished up, DTrace collected
its buffers and said, yep, sure enough, you hit malloc.
And it was under main, under printf,
under the implementation
of printf and right down somewhere in make buff.
So interesting, might be useful for example as the
next thing to know how big was the malloc buffer.
We leave that as an exercise for the reader.
And now we can go back to the slides.
( Period of silence )
Okay. So a little bit more about action statements.
It's really quite a rich computational environment.
It allows complete structure and array access.
If you have a variable that you know in your
process, in the kernel, that's a structure,
you can dig into it by a construct like that.
If you hold a pointer, if you can get your hands
on a pointer in a D Language script like p,
which we know is a struct proc pointer, we can
dereference it and look at pieces of the struct.
We can index into arrays, all right?
So curproc is a special variable
maintained by the interpreter.
We can dereference it.
It, we know it's a structs, struct proc star,
into the p_ucred structure and then foorther
down into the cr_groups array under there.
And that turns out to be the affective
group ID for the current process.
( Period of silence )
Sort of as a side note, it's interesting to know that
there are, there's some opportunity to make decisions
in a D Language script with a conditional
expression of the familiar C sort.
We have a lot, essentially a selection.
( Period of silence )
Well there's something special going on when we can chase
through named pointers and named objects in a sort of C
like fashion on a, a big object like the kernel.
Hmm, we're not recompiling the kernel
with D, but we're able to peer into it.
And that's because DTrace is symbol savvy and type aware.
Has deep knowledge of the UNIX kernel, mock kernel.
It knows every type definition, every struct in union and
every global variable and external symbol in the kernel.
Similarly the, the pid provider can deal with unstripped
binaries, any symbol that you can see with nm -g
on your binary, the pid provider
will be able to offer up to you
and DTrace can again chase pointers,
examine structures and unions.
And the way you get it, get to that functionality
is to use the minus upper case C argument
to DTrace to pull in your own type definitions.
Alright so it, it has a clear understanding of what
C structures look like and can press on that way.
( Period of silence )
So let's take a carefool look at that.
Our previous Hello World example was
built on the printf stdio functions.
These are the file versions of those.
So we include stdio.h, and in there
there's a declaration for stderr
that says it's a pointer to a file structure.
If you've got your machines now, you can look at
stdio.h and see what a upper, FILE upper case is.
It's a structure that contains buffers, lengths and one
interesting field which is the small integer file descriptor
that UNIX uses to communicate the identities of files, okay?
So we'd like to kind of hunt, hunt through the file
pointer to see that number, you know what is that number?
That small integer number that we communicate to UNIX when
we do an fprintf to standard error of the Hello WWDC string.
Well, here's a script that lets us get after that.
It too wants to include stdio since
it wants to manipulate this structure.
We use the pid provider to place a trap, a break point, a
probe point at fprintf, the user of the stderr symbol.
And when that probe fires, we grab the first argument
to fprintf, zero base, so we call it arg0.
Pull in the structure that it points to,
that turns out to be 88 bytes worth of stuff.
Bring it into the DTrace virtual
machine and then manipulate it,
namely print out it's under bar file component.
So let's see how that works.
( Period of silence )
And we'll go to the demo machine.
So here's that program, uses fprintf,
passes this file pointer around.
Here's that D script.
Catches fprintf, grabs that file pointer, hauls it in,
puts it into the DTrace virtual
machine and then digs into it.
All right, so let's run that guy.
Ah cool! So there's the execution, and here's DTrace
telling us, yeah, I caught a call to fprintf.
And the thing you asked me to trace was the small integer 2.
And if you remember your UNIX 101 stdin,
stdout, stderr is zero, one and two.
So makes sense.
Thank goodness.
( Background noises )
So let's go back to the slides once more.
And here's what we just saw.
Sort of glossed over this business of copyin and its
actually a good point now to dig in a little bit deeper here
and expose the sort of foondamental
execution model of DTrace.
It's I think important to have in mind.
DTrace makes very clear distinctions between what
goes on in user land and what goes on in its kernel,
virtual machine, data store let's call it.
And keeping those things straight in your mind
will make it really, really straight forward
to get scripts running right the first time.
So here's the big picture.
We had a script, that's up on the
white, big white box there.
Sent it into the DTrace command,
that got compiled into byte codes.
The byte codes got pushed down into the
DTrace virtual machine, its interpreter.
DTrace actually started the, the -c option,
our little hello_fp program.
At that point, libSystem was instrumented.
A trap was placed on the entry to
fprintf. hello_fp began executing.
It called into fprintf. Passing
that pointer to this file structure.
The trap hits.
The interpreter, the interpreter in the kernel gets invoked.
We begin to execute this code.
In particular we execute a copyin function.
That's a special function that knows how to reach into
the virtual address space of the user land process,
pulls 88 bytes located at arg0,
the pointer stderr back up there.
Drops that into the DTrace virtual machine
data store where we can now manipulate it.
By referencing through the pfile variable,
pushing the result back up for our viewing pleasure
at the end of the execution of this script.
All right.
So if there's copyin, well there must be copyout.
You can copyout something from the DTrace
virtual machine's data store into user land.
But I've been advised here by my session director to stand
very still and soberly announce don't do this at home kids.
You can mess up the stack, data and
all sorts of things in your world.
Can you consider yourself forewarned
and forearmed let's just say that.
All right.
So the copyout action.
Here's that program again.
I'm going to allocate a string this
time to hold the Hello WWDC message.
I don't want to mess with the protected data pages.
I just want a raw memory that I can fooss with here.
So we malloc some space, copy the constant string
hello wwdc, and then we're going to print it right?
Except we're going to interpose a little DTrace
action that will when fprintf is entered,
it's going to copyout its own constant string.
It's going to copy that from DTrace kernel
virtual data store up into user land
and then let things go and let's see what happens.
Notice I've done some carefool counting of
the number of characters in the string.
( Laughter )
Okay, forewarned.
So back to the demo machine.
( Laughter )
Let's see.
Here's that program, I can cat it what the heck.
Right, oh, whoa you don't want to cat
the, let's, let's cat the C code, right?
Good. Yeah.
All right, and then you run it.
Does the right thing, all right.
Here we'll apply that little piece of business.
There's that D script that did the copyout.
I've got to stand up straight again and say, in order
to do this thing, this is called a destructive action
in the DTrace world, you've got to add a
special argument to the DTrace line, right?
You're going to write into some place
where you really shouldn't be.
Take my word.
And away we go, what the heck.
Ah! So there we executed.
Different message this time.
We've done a destructive action and poked
into the address space of this process.
The point of this is if you can understand this interaction
you've, then you've got a clear model of the execution model
for DTrace in your head and you're home free.
All right?
You're good to go.
Let's go back to the slides.
( Period of silence )
So let's talk, I'm going to give you a quick
survey of the D Languages variables.
I promised this at the outset.
They're global variables.
They're just simply utter their names, foo and bar.
You can declare them if you want, initialize them
and use them any place you care to in a D script.
Here we might want to record the very
first time we see Perl do an open.
( Period of silence )
I said before that it's possible to
collect information segregated by threads.
That you know threads come flying through system
calls and all sorts of other probe points.
You may want to collect you know particular
counts based on which thread is coming through.
There's a syntax for that.
Arbitrary, just simply prefix the name of the
variable with self pointer, foo self pointer bar,
this segregates the variable, attaches it to the
particular thread that's flying through this probe point.
All right so we can count the number of thread opens
for this particular invocation of Perl on a thread.
Perhaps we've got you know multiple versions of
these things running in some sort of web server.
And then we have essentially what amount to
equivalents of stack variables in the C language.
Probe quo as locals, they appear and live for the life
of the execution between the braces and then disappear.
Usually used for you know temporary variables.
Right? We want to compute a difference,
we may use that several times.
For efficiency we capture it once and then
let the interpreter use that later on.
Okay, so orthogonal to the sort of scope
issues are kind of dimensionality issues.
So variables can be scalers.
foo, self bar, this baz.
They can appear in arrays and DTrace
arrays are associative arrays.
You can have arbitrary keys and
actually tupoles of keys appearing
between the square braces that index the associative array.
And you can assign arbitrary values on the right hand side.
It's very handy again for sort of teasing out data
based on like for example a particular file descriptor,
a particular socket number, a particular range of addresses.
And then there's this really powerful
notion of aggregations.
We actually started off in our second
example just making use of an aggregation.
That's a, a table, a place where we can count up stuff.
But has a very special property.
It works really well on multi processor systems, all right.
As we scale up to more and more processors, if you
think about assigning into an array, like @trapsTaken,
you don't want to have to take a
global lock to get an atomic update.
So what DTrace has introduced
is this notion of an aggregation.
It's quite a bit like a reduction operator if
you've taken I don't know CS203 or something.
Across a multi processor machine, we maintain these results
in individual copies of the aggregation called @trapsTaken.
And later when we want to the net effect of the
aggregation, we combine them all together at once.
That allows us to proceed synchronization
free on all the processors.
Here's another example.
We can use a tupole to index into this aggregation.
Aggregations are introduced by the
@ sign that's part of the syntax.
But notice there's something special on the right hand side.
I've not done, you know ++ or + another variable.
I've called another function and that's very special.
Because there are just these seven, eight
aggregating functions that DTrace allows.
These functions have all the property that if you
perform them on each of the multi processors,
you can in the end reconstruct the total by just
bringing the, the numbers together and reapplying,
essentially reapplying some versions of function.
So if we count, we just maintain
counts on all these machines.
Time comes to collect the data, pull them all together,
well just add them and we've got the net count.
You need to sum, say byte counts, how many bytes are
being allocated by malloc on this process or by malloc
on that processor, maintain them independently.
When time comes to print the data,
bring them together, just sum them up.
Similarly for maximum, minimum and then
these very interesting quantize functions
that are essentially capturing distributions of values.
You can do the same thing, histograms, and
then combine them at the end into one sort
of grand histogram, one global distribution.
Okay, so quick demonstration of aggregations.
We've seen some of these before.
Here's a, another piece on this.
Good. So we're going to call, we're
going to look at system calls again.
This time the memory map system call.
And it turns out that the second argument to memory
map is the number of bytes you'd like mapped.
Number of bytes you'd like to attain
for their chunk of memory.
Of course since that's zero based, we call that arg1.
We form an aggregation introduced
by the @ sign, call it mmaptotal.
We're going to tease these out by the name
of the process that's doing the mmap.
And just a keep a you know a sort of running total
of all the mmap activity across the system that way.
So off we go.
And what the heck, let's launch Safari and see
what happens during that little piece of work.
And we'll quit.
And absent to anything else, when the script ends
and there's been an aggregation
accumulating, DTrace does the sensible thing.
It says you've been collecting this table of numbers.
I'm going to pull it all together for you
and display it smallest to largest.
And sure enough, we launch Safari here and
it mmapped what 78 megabytes of stuff,
probably it's code segments or the leading piece there.
PubSubAgent, that's interesting.
I hadn't seen that before.
And that would bear some looking into.
Maybe that's a recent feature.
( Laughter )
Okay.
( Period of silence )
So but maybe we're running a little bit more,
we've got this sort of overall global sum.
You know how were these mmaps taken?
Were they for a large chunks of memory, small
chunks of memory, what's the distribution?
So here's where these quantize aggregations come into play.
( Period of silence )
So this time rather than sum the
sizes, we're going to quantize these.
Essentially collect a histogram.
Let's send that off to run and we'll warm launch
Safari this time, it may turn up different.
But it's, it's sort of the same idea.
Quit from here.
Stop the script.
And what we see are the distributions of mmap
sizes organized in a sit on your side histogram.
And split out by executable.
So we see Safari a whole bunch of 16K segments.
Hmm, I'm not so sure they're code segments anymore.
I don't know.
And DTrace itself allocated two very big mmapped buffers.
I know that from how DTrace works.
Gee the dock got interest, did
some interesting stuff in there.
And what was launch D up to?
So.
( Laughter )
Yeah, right.
There's a talk about that, or there
was a talk about that, a great talk.
So often it's the, sort of immediately gestalt impression
of a histogram that leads you to the next question.
You know why was there this one really big thing,
chunked way out there and then you can filter on that.
So again the paradigm of follow
your nose through these things.
And finally suppose we wanted to know the site.
You know where was it that Safari was mmapping, mmapping.
Where was Safari mmapping?
That's an interesting question.
Perhaps to isolate down to a particular framework
where big chunks of resources were being consumed.
So, here's sort of this interesting idea.
We'll look for mmap entries, filter it down to
Safari, the exec name Safari, collect an aggregation,
but now for the key to the table we're
constructing, we'll collect a user stack.
All right?
And the value stored there will be sort of
the net amount of mmapping done at that site.
So let's how that works.
Off we go.
Safari up and away, faster and
faster each time, that's good.
Let's pull down a menu for the heck of it.
Quit, stop here, ah interesting.
Oh, I should have left it running.
One more time.
Run it again.
Safari.
>> Ran the wrong one.
>> I ran the wrong one.
Did I? Yeah I did.
Okay, nice and easy.
That's the one I wanted.
Safari, let's do something, go visit somewhere else.
All right.
All right, now great.
Ah, much better.
We see the wonderful work that
James has done with sybolication.
So, so you know here's a, here's a big collection of
mmaps, mmap calls, netting out to a total of what,
3.3 megabytes made from this stack location.
In libGIF.
That's interesting.
In ImageIO, another 3 megabytes of mMap stuff.
Core foundation similarly.
So it's you know yet another slice and dice, right?
And just by sort of almost elementary
recombination of the elements we've talked about,
lead you to you know sort of very
interesting displays of data.
And seeing them smallest to largest is often very
quickly focuses you on you know where the action is.
Okay, back to the slides.
Good. Good, good, good.
So you're now all DTrace experts, ready
to go out and right tons of scripts.
Well, maybe not, you know you may have a restricted
set of problems you always like to look at.
You maybe want to have some handy
tools you know sort of prestructed.
And that's what the DTrace ToolKit is about.
Freeware again done, first at Sun
Microsystems for Open Solaris.
And imported almost trivially to
our implementation of DTrace.
There's very few changes once you
get the basic DTrace stuff.
The scripts just seem to come right across.
They're a set a handy analysis tools for common
investigations done by a very talented Sun field engineer.
They're, and all DTrace scripts
or D Language programs wrapped
in a little bit of shell wrapper to do argument parsing.
They're readily customized if you have a, you know a sort
of a different need, different take on what you want to see,
you know hit it with your favorite editor.
Browse them, learn about the D Language, some of the
more esoteric patterns appear in some of these scripts.
Sort of useful for a second course in DTrace.
We've got a little more than 40
of 104 scripts ported to Leopard.
The ones that are missing largely rely on
specific, you know Solaris implementation details.
We'll be moving those over in, or many of
them over in the next, in the coming weeks.
But today on your Leopard CD you'll see
around 40 scripts read@y to rock and roll.
They're all on usr/bin.
man pages in a place where just saying
man's such and such will get them.
And there are some interesting annotated examples of how
these things can be used in user share examples, DTTk.
So we spent a lot of time this afternoon
looking at sys calls and how to dive
into them and collect various information.
Well that's all been sort of pulled
together in a tool called dtruss.
It's very popular in the Solaris world.
I find it very useful now on Mac OS X.
Here's its help message.
Gives the list of arguments, the
things that it knows how to do.
The argument sort of partition into what
thing do we, do you want me to look at.
Is it already running?
Or do I want to start it up by using the last option command,
just utter the name of the thing on the command line.
Do we want to filter down to just a particular
set of system calls or see everything in sight?
Should we print summary counts?
Do we want to look at times?
Back traces and a demo.
Wow.
( Laughter )
( Period of silence )
Click to type.
So let's run dtruss now.
We're going to collect counts and the thing we want to
look at is the dock which is already running.
So it's, oh, we go right over the dock and
it begins to react to our mouse motions.
Interesting.
Pop up a menu.
Cause something to show.
And at the end I just stopped it, we see a
summary of all the system calls it passed by.
And just to look up a little bit in the scroll, process
number 96 an isolary process number for the dock,
a thread identifier, the kernel thread that sits behind
the particular thread that dove into the system call.
The name of the system call.
Some of its arguments.
The immediate return value of the system
call and any error node that was set.
And so here we see for some reason we
weren't allowed to make dir probably
because it already exists on user Apple library preferences.
Return minus 1, that's error node
17 and you can look that up
in syserrnode.h. All right,
back to the slides one more time.
( Period of silence )
So does that look green?
It should.
The notion is here's our roster
of providers in Mac OS X at WWDC.
fbt function boundary tracing we
didn't talk much about that.
But it's in that initial list of 20,000 probe points.
You can see the entry and return
from any function in the UNIX kernel.
lockstat, particular semantic
knowledge about kernel locking.
vminfo, we took a quick look at,
see where page faults occur.
proc, life of processes in the system.
io, where I/O occurs.
Profile, timed events, system calls
we done, did a ton with, mach traps.
Sort of the mach world compliment to a system call.
plockstats, those are locks up in user land.
p thread locking.
And you can investigate the behavior of
those things using the plockstat provider.
pid and Objective-C we talked quite a bit about.
usdt, which are static probes up in user land.
An advanced DTrace topic and we
believe Dave will be talking about those
in the advanced DTrace and Xray session tomorrow.
And finally sort of like a gift, when you've got
DTrace and user, user land probes working right,
you begin to pick up what's going on in the
other communities around Perl, Python, Ruby,
and now the Java 6.0 preview have, all
have DTrace instrumentation points
that are ready to rock and roll on Mac OS X.
( Period of silence )
So the summary, the take home message.
The DTrace approach unlike the monolithic
tools we've previously had, ktrace, trace,
is incremental, exploratory and improvisional.
So follow your nose.
Aggregation turns out to be the really
powerful, powerful piece of work.
And finally you're going to find all these facilities in
the Seed as it was delivered to you earlier this week.
More information there is manual pages, the examples
for the DTrace ToolKit scripts that I mentioned.
A vital and vibrant community of
DTrace users at opensolaris.org.
And a discussion mailing list that's
again lively and fun to keep an eye on.